# GROMACS 2024.1 release notes

This version was released on February 28th, 2024. These release notes
document the changes that have taken place in
GROMACS since the previous 2024.0 version, to
fix known issues. It also incorporates all fixes made in version 2023.4
and earlier, which you can find described in the `release-notes`.

## Fixes where mdrun could behave incorrectly

### Avoid rounding errors with Parrinello-Rahman coupling of triclinic boxes

With triclinic boxes and isotropic or diagonal Parrinello-Rahman
pressure coupling, the off-diagonal scaling matrix arguments could be
non-zero. This was harmless, apart from causing an assertion failure
when update was executed on a GPU.

`4974`

## Fixes for `gmx` tools

### Fixed parsing of phases in gmx nmtraj

`4968`

## Fixes that affect portability

### Fix compiler flag check with oneAPI DPC++

Some compiler warning flags were not tested properly when compiling for
NVIDIA/AMD GPUs using Intel oneAPI. No user-facing impact expected.

`5005`

## Miscellaneous

### Address mdrun performance regression with non-bonded interactions on CPU

The heuristics for choosing the inner pair-list interval has been
improved to regain or improve the performance on non-bonded interactions
on the CPU. Correctness is unaffected.

`4988`

### Fixed nbnxm-test failure when bounds checking was enabled for stdlib

`4966` `4973`

### Increase tolerance of mdrun continuation tests in double precision

The mdrun continuation tests could fail in double precision with errors
just above the tolerance.

`4788` `4931`

### Fix missing OpenMP initialization in grompp

The problem only manifested as a pop-up message when running
`gmx grompp` built with Visual Studio. Since this message was blocking
the application, it could mess up with test suite or automated scripts.
No other deleterious effects noted.

`4961`

### Fix grompp & mdrun crash when GMX_USE_COLVARS=NONE

Colvars MDModule was not properly constructed when the Colvars library
was not compiled. Colvars mdp fields handler was returning a nullptr.

`4980`

### Fix broken completion script on zsh-5.9 (Mac OS Sonoma)

The compinit command must be loaded by the script before loading
bashcompinit, or there will be an error message when sourcing GMXRC on
some zsh versions.

`4986`
