# GROMACS 2021.4 release notes

This version was released on November 5th, 2021. These release notes
document the changes that have taken place in
GROMACS since the previous 2021.3 version, to
fix known issues. It also incorporates all fixes made in version 2020.6
and earlier, which you can find described in the `release-notes`.

## Fixes where mdrun could behave incorrectly

### Fixed crash for large system with virtual sites

When large system with virtual sites were ran with domain decomposition
and OpenMP threading, mdrun would crash when the number of atoms in a
domain and its halo were more than 200000.

`4167`

### Fixed bug with GPU LINCS occasionally shifting atoms in wrong direction

Due to missing blocking synchronizations in the CUDA version of LINCS,
the shared memory was occasionally overwritten with the new data. This
may slightly affect the final coordinates of the shifted atoms.

`4199`

### Disabled the use of PME Mixed mode for FEP simulations

The use of Mixed mode PME (`-pme gpu -pmefft cpu`) led to incorrect
computation of ${\frac{\partial V}{\partial {\lambda}}}$ in FEP
simulations.

Mixed mode is only used when explicitly requested by the user.

`4190`

### Fixed spurious nan in AWH free energy output when running FEP with other dimensions

When running AWH with alchemical free energy perturbations as one of
multiple dimensions the free energy output could contain nan entries due
to failing log operations. This did not affect the AWH bias, which means
that the simulations were not affected as such, but the output was.

`4180`

### Made mdrun work without MPI

When configured with neither of MPI or thread-MPI, mdrun would terminate
with an assertion failure.

`4264`

## Fixes for `gmx` tools

### Fix `gmx convert-tpr -s -o`

Formerly, this combination could be used when supplying an index file.
Now this combination can also be used with default index groups when not
supplying an index file.

### grompp now prints a note again when combining center of mass motion removal and position restraints

`4128`

### Static selections of large index groups now work

Commands like
`gmx distance -f traj.xtc -n ndx.ndx -select "group \"Contacts\""` only
worked if the size of `Contacts` was less than the number of atoms. This
restriction was a bug, and has been fixed so that `Contacts` make take
any size.

Other similar uses of static selections derived from index groups will
also now work.

`4148`

### Static selections of index groups with repeated indices now work

Static groups from index files referenced in selections (e.g.
`gmx tool -select "group \"Contacts\""`) only worked correctly if they
never had adjacent repeats of the same index within the group. Repeating
the same index can be meaningful e.g. in lists of inter-atomic distances
to analyze with `gmx distance` to analyze `"1 2 2 3"`. Previously, the
index group had to be written like `"2 3 1 2"` in order to work.

`4149`

## Fixes that affect portability

## Miscellaneous

### Fix a bug affecting re-run gmxapi scripts

A typo may have prevented gmxapi simulations from continuing from
checkpoints after being interrupted. Fixed in version 0.2.3 of the
gmxapi Python package.

`4267`
