# GROMACS 2023.4 release notes

This version was released on January 24th, 2024. These release notes
document the changes that have taken place in
GROMACS since the previous 2023.3 version, to
fix known issues. It also incorporates all fixes made in version 2022.6
and earlier, which you can find described in the `release-notes`.

## Fixes where mdrun could behave incorrectly

### Freezing AWH simulations with multiple MPI ranks per walker

AWH simulations with biases shared by multiple walkers and using
multiple MPI ranks per walker would hang when outputting energy, i.e.,
already at step 0.

There would not be any incorrect results.

`4925`

### With AWH for FE, mdrun could exit with an assertion failure

The would happen e.g. when using soft-core only for LJ, whereas it was
also needed for Coulomb or when decoupling large molecules. Now proper
error messages are generated.

`4938`

### Missing force contribution on neighbor search steps with GPU update

On a neighbor search step, when virial is not\_
computed (i.e., when `nstlist` is not a
multiple of `nstpcouple`) and GPU update is
used, there could have been a race between GPU buffer clearing and
copying of forces computed on the CPU, leading to missing some of the
force contribution on this step.

This should not have ever happened unless the GPU was heavily
oversubscribed or hipSYCL/AdaptiveCpp was used, and even in those cases,
the problem was very unlikely to manifest.

`4937`

## Fixes for `gmx` tools

### GROMACS error messages no longer include broken links

Two error messages used to contain links to the contents that are no
longer available on the GROMACS website. These
links have been replaced with the links to the relevant pages in the
current documentation.

### Fixed a segmentation fault in grompp with AWH and FEP without FEP states

`4932`

### `gmx msd` now raises a proper error when given incompatible trajectory

`gmx msd` internally converts frame times to picoseconds. As a
consequence, if the time cannot be expressed as an integral number of
picoseconds (usually due to too frequent trajectory output), the tool
would crash or produce an incorrect result.

Now, an error is printed in such cases.

`4694`

## Fixes that affect portability

### Fixed compilation with Boost 1.83

`4909`

## Miscellaneous

A grompp warning when using Parrinello-Rahman pressure coupling
combining with position restraints suggested to use Berendsen instead.
This suggestion has now been changed to C-rescale.
