# Getting started

In this chapter we assume the reader is familiar with Molecular Dynamics
and familiar with Unix, including the use of a text editor such as
`jot`, `emacs` or `vi`. We furthermore assume the
GROMACS software is installed properly on your
system. When you see a line like

    ls -l

you are supposed to type the contents of that line on your computer
terminal.

## Setting up your environment

In order to check whether you have access to
GROMACS, please start by entering the command:

    gmx -version

This command should print out information about the version of
GROMACS installed. If this, in contrast,
returns the phrase

    gmx: command not found.

then you have to find where your version of
GROMACS is installed. In the default case, the
binaries are located in `/usr/local/gromacs/bin`, however, you can ask
your local system administrator for more information, and then follow
the advice for `getting access to |Gromacs|`.

## Flowchart of typical simulation

A typical simulation workflow with GROMACS is
`illustrated here <flow>`.

## Important files

Here is an overview of the most important
GROMACS file types that you will encounter.

### Molecular Topology file (`.top`)

The molecular topology file is generated by the program `gmx pdb2gmx`.
`gmx pdb2gmx` translates a `PDB` structure file of any peptide or
protein to a molecular topology file. This topology file contains a
complete description of all the interactions in your peptide or protein.

### Topology \#include file mechanism

When constructing a system topology in a `top` file for presentation to
grompp, GROMACS uses a built-in version of the
so-called C preprocessor, cpp (in GROMACS 3,
it really was cpp). cpp interprets lines like:

    #include "ions.itp"

by looking for the indicated file in the current directory, the
GROMACS share/top directory as indicated by
the GMXLIB environment variable, and any directory indicated by a `-I`
flag in the value of the include `run parameter <include>` in the `mdp`
file. It either finds this file or reports a warning. (Note that when
you supply a directory name, you should use Unix-style forward slashes
'/', not Windows-style backslashes '' for separators.) When found, it
then uses the contents exactly as if you had cut and pasted the included
file into the main file yourself. Note that you should not go and do
this copy-and-paste yourself, since the main purposes of the include
file mechanism are to re-use previous work, make future changes easier,
and prevent typos.

Further, `cpp` interprets code such as:

    #ifdef POSRES_WATER
    ; Position restraint for each water oxygen
    [ position_restraints ]
    ;  i funct       fcx        fcy        fcz
        1    1       1000       1000       1000
    #endif

by testing whether the preprocessor variable `POSRES_WATER` was defined
somewhere (i.e. "if defined"). This could be done with
`#define POSRES_WATER` earlier in the `top` file (or its `#include`
files), with a `-D` flag in the `include` run parameter as above, or on
the command line to `cpp`. The function of the `-D` flag is borrowed
from the similar usage in `cpp`. The string that follows `-D` must match
exactly; using `-DPOSRES` will not trigger `#ifdef POSRE` or
`#ifdef DPOSRES`. This mechanism allows you to change your `mdp` file to
choose whether or not you want position restraints on your solvent,
rather than your `top` file. Note that preprocessor variables are not
the same as shell environment variables.

### Molecular Structure file (`.gro`, `.pdb`)

When `gmx pdb2gmx` is executed to generate a molecular topology, it also
translates the structure file (`pdb` file) to a GROMOS structure file
(`gro` file). The main difference between a `pdb` file and a gromos file
is their format and that a `gro` file can also hold velocities. However,
if you do not need the velocities, you can also use a `PDB` file in all
programs. To generate a box of solvent molecules around the peptide, the
program `gmx solvate` is used. First the program `gmx editconf` should
be used to define a box of appropriate size around the molecule.
`gmx solvate` solvates a solute molecule (the peptide) into any solvent
(in this case, water). The output of `gmx solvate` is a gromos structure
file of the peptide solvated in water. `gmx solvate` also changes the
molecular topology file (generated by `gmx pdb2gmx`) to add solvent to
the topology.

### Molecular Dynamics parameter file (`.mdp`)

The Molecular Dynamics Parameter (`mdp`) file contains all information
about the Molecular Dynamics simulation itself e.g. time-step, number of
steps, temperature, pressure etc. The easiest way of handling such a
file is by adapting a `sample mdp file
\<mdp\>` file.

### Index file (`.ndx`)

Sometimes you may need an index file to specify actions on groups of
atoms (e.g. temperature coupling, accelerations, freezing). Usually the
default index groups will be sufficient, so for this demo we will not
consider the use of index files.

### Run input file (`.tpr`)

The next step is to combine the molecular structure (`gro` file),
topology (`top` file) MD-parameters (`mdp` file) and (optionally) the
index file (`ndx`) to generate a run input file (`tpr` extension). This
file contains all information needed to start a simulation with
GROMACS. The `gmx grompp` program processes
all input files and generates the run input `tpr` file.

### Trajectory file (`.trr`, `.tng`, or `.xtc`)

Once the run input file is available, we can start the simulation. The
program which starts the simulation is called `gmx mdrun`. The only
input file of `gmx mdrun` that you usually need in order to start a run
is the run input file (`tpr` file). The typical output files of
`gmx mdrun` are the trajectory file (`trr` file), a logfile (`log`
file), and perhaps a checkpoint file (`cpt` file).

## Tutorial material

There are several [tutorials]() available that cover aspects of using
GROMACS. There are also
[third-party-tutorials](). Further information can also be found in the
`How to <../how-to/index>` section.

## Background reading

- Berendsen, H.J.C., Postma, J.P.M., van Gunsteren, W.F.,
  Hermans, J. (1981) Intermolecular Forces, chapter Interaction models
  for water in relation to protein hydration, pp 331-342. Dordrecht: D.
  Reidel Publishing Company Dordrecht
- Kabsch, W., Sander, C. (1983). Dictionary of protein secondary
  structure: Pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical
  features. Biopolymers **22**, 2577--2637.
- Mierke, D.F., Kessler, H. (1991). Molecular dynamics with dimethyl
  sulfoxide as a solvent. Conformation of a cyclic hexapeptide. J. Am.
  Chem. Soc. **113**, 9446.
- Stryer, L. (1988). Biochemistry vol. 1, p. 211. New York: Freeman, 3
  edition.
