# Viscosity calculation

The shear viscosity is a property of liquids that can be determined
easily by experiment. It is useful for parameterizing a force field
because it is a kinetic property, while most other properties which are
used for parameterization are thermodynamic. The viscosity is also an
important property, since it influences the rates of conformational
changes of molecules solvated in the liquid.

The viscosity can be calculated from an equilibrium simulation using an
Einstein relation:

$$
\eta = \frac{1}{2}\frac{V}{k_B T} \lim_{t \rightarrow \infty}
\frac{\mbox{d}}{\mbox{d} t} \left\langle
\left( \int_{t_0}^{{t_0}+t} P_{xz}(t') \mbox{d} t' \right)^2
\right\rangle_{t_0}
$$

This can be done with `gmx energy `. This method converges
rather slowly `149 <refHess2002a>`, and usually hundreds of nanoseconds
are needed for an accurate determination of the viscosity. The result is
very dependent on the treatment of the electrostatics. Using a (short)
cut-off results in large noise on the off-diagonal pressure elements,
which can increase the calculated viscosity by an order of magnitude. It
is most convenient to use the Einstein relation. Because `gmx mdrun`
stores averages of quantities computed every `nstcalcenergy` steps, the
Einstein relation can use these averages and thus writing to energy file
(`nstenergy`) can be done infrequently. This avoids the overhead of very
large energy files that are needed with the autocorrelation function
approach.

GROMACS also has two non-equilibrium methods
for determining the viscosity. The recommended method is to apply a
shear to the system, see the next section. The viscosity can the be
measured as the stress of the corresponding off-diagonal element of the
pressure tensor divided by the shear rate. This is a straightforward
procedure. The only disadvantage is that one needs to balance the cost
of long simulatiosn at low shear rate due to low signal to noise ratio
to the risk of shear thinning appearing at higher shear rates. Running
at multiple shear rates might be necessary to ensure that one is in the
linear regime.

The second non-equilibrium method is called "cosine acceleration". This
makes use of the fact that energy, which is fed into system by external
forces, is dissipated through viscous friction. The generated heat is
removed by coupling to a heat bath. For a Newtonian liquid adding a
small force will result in a velocity gradient according to the
following equation:

$$
a_x(z) + \frac{\eta}{\rho} \frac{\partial^2 v_x(z)}{\partial z^2} = 0
$$

Here we have applied an acceleration $a_x(z)$ in the $x$-direction,
which is a function of the $z$-coordinate. In
GROMACS the acceleration profile is:

$$
a_x(z) = A \cos\left(\frac{2\pi z}{l_z}\right)
$$

where $l_z$ is the height of the box. The generated velocity profile
is:

$$
v_x(z) = V \cos\left(\frac{2\pi z}{l_z}\right)
$$

$$
V = A \frac{\rho}{\eta}\left(\frac{l_z}{2\pi}\right)^2
$$

The viscosity can be calculated from $A$ and $V$:

$$
\eta = \frac{A}{V}\rho \left(\frac{l_z}{2\pi}\right)^2
$$

In the simulation $V$ is defined as:

$$
V = \frac{\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^N m_i v_{i,x} 2 \cos\left(\frac{2\pi z}{l_z}\right)}
{\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^N m_i}
$$

The generated velocity profile is not coupled to the heat bath.
Moreover, the velocity profile is excluded from the kinetic energy. One
would like $V$ to be as large as possible to get good statistics.
However, the shear rate should not be so high that the system gets too
far from equilibrium. The maximum shear rate occurs where the cosine is
zero, the rate being:

$$
\mbox{sh}_{\max} =  \max_z \left| \frac{\partial v_x(z)}{\partial z} \right|
= A \frac{\rho}{\eta} \frac{l_z}{2\pi}
$$

For a simulation with: $\eta=10^{-3}$ \[kgm$^{-1}$s$^{-1}$\],
$\rho=10^3$\[kgm$^{-3}$\] and $l_z=2\pi$\[nm\],
$\mbox{sh}_{\max}=1$\[psnm$^{-1}$\] $A$. This shear rate should be
smaller than one over the longest correlation time in the system. For
most liquids, this will be the rotation correlation time, which is
around 10 ps. In this case, $A$ should be smaller than
0.1\[nmps$^{-2}$\]. When the shear rate is too high, the observed
viscosity will be too low. Because $V$ is proportional to the square
of the box height, the optimal box is elongated in the $z$-direction.
In general, a simulation length of 100 ps is enough to obtain an
accurate value for the viscosity.

The heat generated by the viscous friction is removed by coupling to a
heat bath. Because this coupling is not instantaneous the real
temperature of the liquid will be slightly lower than the observed
temperature. Berendsen derived this temperature
shift `31 <refBerendsen91>`, which can be written in terms of the shear
rate as:

$$
T_s = \frac{\eta\,\tau}{2 \rho\,C_v} \mbox{sh}_{\max}^2
$$

where $\tau$ is the coupling time for the Berendsen thermostat and
$C_v$ is the heat capacity. Using the values of the example above,
$\tau=10^{-13}$ \[s\] and $C_v=2 \cdot 10^3$\[J
kg$^{-1}$K$^{-1}$\], we get:
$T_s=25$\[Kps$^{-2}$\]sh$_{\max}^2$. When we want the shear rate
to be smaller than $1/10$\[ps$^{-1}$\], $T_s$ is smaller than
0.25\[K\], which is negligible.

**Note** that the system has to build up the velocity profile when
starting from an equilibrium state. This build-up time is of the order
of the correlation time of the liquid.

Two quantities are written to the energy file, along with their averages
and fluctuations: $V$ and $1/\eta$, as obtained from
(`%s <eqnvisc>`).
